it's an unwanted title coronavirus super
spreader and unfortunately it's been
awarded to the cruise ship industry in
Australia and all over the world cruise
liners have proven to be the perfect
host for the disease in confined spaces
with lots of happy people covered 19
thrives the companies which operate the
ships tell us the well-being of their
passengers is their priority but tonight
Tom Stein Fateh reveals how profits are
the real captains of this industry the
market is floating powerses for holiday
fun
[Music]
but there's a nasty underbelly to the
cruising industry you've effectively
worked on the dark side previously
what's the playbook the playbook is
admitting nothing get away with
everything you can they're a dirty bunch
quite frankly now with thousands of
passengers globally suffering from
covert 19 caught on these ships are so
sick that I was worried that I was going
to be left on the ship to die it's
becoming clear that cruise companies
knew much more about coronavirus onboard
than they let on
a very small group of people you don't
text you don't know you bury your head
in the sand tonight we reveal the
Barneses cruise companies paid to senior
management incentivizing them to sweep
things under the carpet they're trying
to cover up this epidemic they're trying
to take no responsibility when clearly
they've led to the spread of this
pandemic it was unbelievable it's like
the Wild West what happened in Australia
do you look back at the last couple of
months and think what happened yeah I'd
like to start 2020 again I think when
Tony land arrow and his wife Carrie were
waiting to board what was to become the
infamous last cruise of the Ruby
Princess in March they could never have
predicted the dire turn their journey
would take we are in unchartered
territory
three days after they left covert 19 was
declared a pandemic but Tony said they
weren't worried because they're
traveling companions had been told by
Princess Cruises a week out from the
voyage that it was still safe to sail
they said yes it's fine we'll be
screening and you'll be fine so let help
allay our fears you were effectively
being guided by Princess Cruises at that
point they said it's good to go
and that made you feel comfortable yeah
that did make us feel comfortable
despite those assurances eight days into
the trip Tony came down with flu-like
symptoms so he decided to take himself
to the onboard medical center did they
discuss coronavirus with you in the
medical center there the doctor didn't
believe I had crown a virus but we did
it was mentioned yes she believed had
something who was stressing my heart a
flu or something like that was causing
the heart to do crazy things it seems a
little bit hard to believe in that
you've got flu-like symptoms that
they've tested you here for influenza A
and influenza B you've come back
negative to both of those so what is
this mystery crazy illness as you just
described it mm-hmm
sounds silly now doesn't it that now
it's obvious Tony's health deteriorated
rapidly in less than three days later
this is how he left the Ruby princess
when it docked in the middle of the
night in Sydney on March 19 paramedics
covered in PPE loaded him into an
ambulance
strangely doctors on board were still
adamant he wasn't suffering coronavirus
instead telling New South Wales health
officials Tony's heart was failing but
when he got to Royal Prince Alfred
hospital he tested positive to the virus
he's now one of more than 600 passengers
who caught covert 19 off that one Ruby
Princess cruise once a doctor said to
you you've got covert 19 did you start
to think this could kill me yes I was
feeling very ill at that stage I got a
lot worse I'd actually had a seizure in
the emergency department so I was you
know very fearful for my life and yeah
that was a real struggle yep
how irresponsible and reckless to board
in Sydney disembark all these passengers
not testing the majority of them and
allowing them to expose the Australian
residents with this virus Derby chalak
is a florida-based lawyer now suing
Princess Cruises on behalf of dozens of
us-based
Ruby Princess passengers she says it's
extraordinary that the ship had more
than a hundred people on board reporting
respiratory infection but only 15 were
actually tested for coronavirus it's a
pretty simple process we see here if you
don't test me one for coronavirus you
can't have any one confirmed with
coronavirus that sounds like exactly the
message they wanted their staff to know
you know they did not want high numbers
of people tested because the more they
you test the more you'll find out our
positive
Princess Cruises knew better than anyone
about the rapid spread of coronavirus on
ships and the drama that causes when
docking Australian passengers were
locked in cabins but the Diamond
Princess ended up being stuck in Japan
for weeks in February with more than 700
passengers eventually testing positive
to Cove at 19 another day in limbo for
thousands of passengers been in March
the Grand Princess was stopped from
docking by the US government again with
numerous cases on board it costs the
cruise company Millions Princess Cruises
already knew from the debacle with the
Crown Princess in California that if you
declare ahead how many passengers on
board have contracted the virus the
president Trump said well no you're not
allowed to dock here then they clearly
weren't going to make that same mistake
in Sydney yeah clearly they did not want
to be honest with the Australian
Government about how many infections
were aboard their ship because they have
to go through that whole process yet
again and probably would not have been
allowed to dock they didn't want to lose
more money yet again it turns out it's
not just cruise companies that lose
money when ships are delayed we can
reveal that senior staff on board have a
big financial incentive as well a
whistleblower who's a senior officer has
shown us a contract the details the
lucrative bonus incentives for
management if they can avoid any
government interference when a ship
docks basically get in and out of port
as quickly as possible
there are discretionary bonuses that can
be paid to the senior executives on the
cruise ships jamocha has been fighting
major cruise companies in courtrooms
for more than 30 years so he certainly
knows all about their tactics he worries
that senior executive bonuses could have
discouraged the reporting of coronavirus
onboard cruise ships so they have an
executive committee that monitors the
profitability of all their operations
and there are bonuses that can go
directly to
many members of the executive committee
when they keep their expenses down and
their profits up Princess Cruises has
admitted to 60 minutes it does have a
bonus scheme relating to the company's
overall performance but denies passing
on incentives to avoid any delays and
when it comes to generating profits Jim
believes nothing is off-limits for them
even treating sick passengers can be a
money-spinner the medical center is on
board there for the good of patients
health or they're for the good of the
cruise ships bottom line ship
infirmaries have a sole purpose of
making a profit for the cruise line so
that the profit comes from the
passengers who go down and they end up
paying four or five six hundred dollars
for a basic you know 15 minute
consultation with a minimal medicine
being provided on board princess ships
just to go to the medical center will
set you back a hundred and fifty dollars
and if you need an after-hours service
that almost doubles to two hundred and
eighty dollars they're fleecing their
passengers they treat their passengers
like walking ATMs the prohibitive cost
structure of the medical centers on
board days cruise ships I mean it did it
almost serve in the end is a convenient
way to cover up the level of coronavirus
on board the Ruby princess if you can
knock out a good portion of the of the
passengers who are going to test
positive because you make it too
expensive for them to show up at the
infirmary yes I wouldn't hesitate in
saying they're trying to cover up their
problem should all medical checks then
have been made free for passengers sure
they should have provided free of charge
medical treatment I mean you can't have
a situation where people are reluctant
to go to the ship infirmary because
their chart they're being afraid of
being charged for for the services that
are to be provided
tony'll and arrow was one who did go to
the medical center but before he was
even stretchered off the ship Princess
Cruises had already drained eight and a
half thousand dollars in medical costs
from his credit card when you're very
ill it's it's very hard to have that
other stress like if you're having a
heart attack or or struggling to breathe
they have that other stress of trying to
find that money I had to sort of
transfer some money from one account to
another and that had left us broke as we
come off the ship
when the crews finally docked here
doctors on board claimed that neither
Tony or any other passengers had
coronavirus so it raised eyebrows last
week when a special commission of
inquiry into the ruby princess the
ship's senior doctor admitted she'd told
paramedics taking tony to hospital they
must be wearing a full PPE which looking
back now seems like an unusual request
for a patient who was apparently
suffering a heart condition I would have
just said they need to go to a hospital
and they need to have the appropriate
that the endless and you staff meter the
appropriate PPE in place it doesn't take
a rocket scientist to know that if
you're telling ambulance workers to show
up covered in PPE in advance before
coming near these passengers and you're
suspecting Kovac 19 Tony is finally
covered negative but he's still
recovering from that brutal bout of
coronavirus he's now one of 600
passengers part of an Australian class
action against Princess Cruises this
week Princess Cruises told us all
passengers with respiratory illness will
have had their medical expenses refunded
but Tony is yet to see a cent and
there's still one thing that all the
money in the world won't change for him
you've ever go on a cruise ship again I
gotta say I'll never ever ever ever ever
ever got cruise again Jim what would you
say 20 Australians out there right now
that are still thinking about booking a
cruising holiday in the future III would
suggest that you consider other options
quite frankly so if someone contact us
and says well I didn't have a good
cruise Mike
what I'm thinking is you got off that
cruise with your life and you should be
thankful for that we've had I can't tell
you how many dozens and dozens of
passengers who go on a vacation cruise
with their loved ones and they get off
on a body bag it's not a safe place to
be
you're you're really risking your your
your life and life to if you love the
ones in going on a cruise
hello I'm Tara Brown
thanks for watching to keep up with the
latest from 60 minutes Australia make
sure you subscribe to our Channel you
can also download the 9 now app for full
episodes and other exclusive 60 minutes
content